# Capstone Module 3
Capstone Project Module 3, Study case : Bike Sharing by Siti Hanifah Sadiah

### **Context**

Bike-sharing systems are a new generation of traditional bike rentals where the whole process, from membership, rental, and return back, has become automatic. Through these systems, a user can easily rent a bike from a particular position and return back at another position. Currently, there are about over 500 bike-sharing programs around the world which is composed of over 500 thousand bicycles. **Today, great interest exists in these systems due to their important role in traffic, environmental, and health issues.**

Apart from interesting real-world applications of bike-sharing systems, **the characteristics of data generated by these systems make them attractive for research.** Unlike other transport services such as buses or subways, the duration of travel, departure, and arrival position is explicitly recorded in these systems. This feature turns the bike-sharing system into a virtual sensor
network that can be used for sensing mobility in the city. Hence, it is expected that the most important events in the city could be detected by monitoring these data.

**Capital Bikeshare** (also abbreviated CaBi) is a bicycle-sharing system which serves Washington, D.C., and certain counties of the larger metropolitan area. As of January 2023, it had 700+ stations and more than 5400 bicycles. The member jurisdictions own most of the equipment and have sourced operations to contractor Motivate International. Opened in September 2010, the system is the third largest bike sharing service in the United States.

The Capital Bikeshare system is owned by the Local governments of the areas served (seven participating jurisdictions: Washington, D.C., Northern Virginia (Alexandria, Arlington, Fairfax County, Falls Church), Maryland (Montgomery County, Prince George's County)) and is operated by **Motivate International, Inc.** (formerly Alta Bicycle Share). Motivate is based in Brooklyn, New York and operates Citi Bike in New York City, Bluebikes in Boston, FordGoBike in San Francisco, and Divvy Bikes in Chicago.

Capital Bikeshare is designed to get riders from point A to point B, similar to a bus or a train. Riders can choose short-term access (24-Hour Pass) or long-term access (30-Day Membership or Annual Membership). Riders take a bike from any station, ride to their destination and return it to any available station.

Capital Bikeshare is available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week and 365 days a year. All trips under 45 minutes on classic bikes are included for members. Members unlock bikes for free and pay the discounted rate of $0.10 per minute for ebikes. For members who ride longer than 45 minutes, a $0.05 per minute rate will apply. Casual riders do not have included minutes on classic rides and pay $1 to unlock and $0.05 per minute for classic bike rides and $0.15 per minute for ebikes.

Capital Bikeshare **Vision** : “Life connected by pedal strokes.”

Capital Bikeshare **Mission** : “To transform our community by providing a high quality, convenient and affordable bicycle transit system that will connect people to more places where they live, work and play in the region.”

In order to achieve its vision and mission, Capital Bikeshare is expected to be able to provide bicycles according to the number of user requests. Determining the number of bicycles that must be provided by Capital Bikeshare needs to be carefully calculated so that there are no shortages or excesses. If there is a shortage of bicycles, Capital Bikeshare can be considered a failure in achieveing its vision and mission. Meanwhile, if there is an excess number of bicycles, the utility of bicycles will be low and have a negative impact on operational management carried out by Motivate International, Inc. such as the low level of Return on Investment (ROI) that has been given by Local governments to buy assets in the form of bicycles.

### **Problem Statement**

One of the biggest challenges for Capital Bikeshare is achieveing its vision and mission, where Motivate International, Inc. is responsible for the implementation of operations to The Local Governments by providing optimal service to users and maintaining the efficiency of assets owned, number of bicycles.

The increasing number of Capital Bikeshare users shows positive enthusiasm from the citizen. **Therefore, determining the right number of bicycles in the future is very important in order to achieve the vision and mission of Capital Bikeshare, financially profitable for both The Local Governments as the owner and for Motivate International, Inc. as the operator, as well as providing excellent service to users.**

### **Goals**

Based on the problem statement, Capital Bikeshare certainly needs to have tools that can predict the exact number of bicycles that will be used by users in the future. Many factors can determine a user's preference to use bicycle, so that it can increase the accuracy of the prediction of the number of bicycles that Capital Bikeshare must provide. The availability of bicycles in the right quantity can increase user satisfaction and increase the utility of the bicycles itselfs.

For Capital Bikeshare, a prediction tool that can accurately predict the number of bicycles can increase the utility of the assets owned (bikes). **In other words, the accuracy of the availability of the number of bicycles according to the user's demand means that it can increase the revenue obtained from the pricing fee paid by the user to use the bicycle.**

### **Analytic Approach**

So, what we need to do is analyze the data to be able to find patterns from the features that determine the user to use the bicycle.

Next, we will build a regression model that will help Capital Bikeshare to be able to provide predictive tools for the number of bicycles needed by users in the future. This will be very useful to Motivate International, Inc. to be able to provide optimal service for users and provide financial benefits for themselves as operators and for The Local Governments as owners.

### **Metric Evaluation**

The evaluation metrics to be used are RMSE, MAE, and MAPE. RMSE is the average square root of the error, MAE is the average absolute value of the error, while MAPE is the average percentage of error generated by the regression model. The smaller the RMSE, MAE, and MAPE values, it means that the model is more accurate in predicting the number of bicycles needed according to the feature limitations used.

Besides that, we can also use R-squared or adj values. R-squared if the model that will be selected as the final model is a linear model. The R-squared value is used to determine how well the model can represent the overall variance of the data. The closer to 1, the more fit the model to the observation data. However, this metric is not valid for non-linear models.

## **Data Understanding**

The dataset was created by Hadi Fanaee-T from The Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence and Decision Support (LIAAD), University of Porto.

Bike-sharing rental process is highly correlated to the environmental and seasonal settings. For instance, weather conditions, precipitation, day of week, season, hour of the day, etc. can affect the rental behaviors. The core data set is related to the two-year historical log corresponding to years 2011 and 2012 from Capital Bikeshare system, Washington D.C., USA which is publicly available in http://capitalbikeshare.com/system-data. Weather information are extracted from http://www.freemeteo.com.

- The dataset consist of the total bicycles used by Capital Bikeshare users from 2011 to 2012.
- Each row of data represents information related to factors that influence the user rent a bicycle every hour.

## **Conclusion**

Based on the modeling that has been done, feature hour is the most influential feature on the number of overall rented bikes.

  The evaluation metrics used in the model are RMSE, MAE & MAPE values. If we look at the MAPE value generated by the model after hyperparameter tuning, it is ~ 51%. However, MAPE cannot be used in this bike sharing dataset because there are zero or close-to-zero values. To overcome these issues with MAPE, we can use Mean Absolute Scaled Error (MASE) and the result is ~28% trained on the model (maximum number of overall rented bikes = 970), then the estimate of the number of overall rented bikes on average will miss by approximately 28% of the actual number of overall rented bikes.
 
  However, it is also possible that the prediction will miss further because the bias generated by the model is still quite high when viewed from the visualization between the actual and predicted number of overall rented bikes. The bias generated by this model is due to the limited features in the dataset that can represent other aspects of the user in using rented bikes such as the influence of climate changes, social support, personal preference and attitude, precipitation, traffic conditions, wind speed, air quality, and others.

  Of course, this model can still be imported in order to produce even better predictions such as paying better attention to the date feature or in other words building a time series regression ML model. However, we can do A/B testing of the models that have been made in this project to determine the level of effectiveness of using the model to predict the number of overall rented bikes. Later, from the results of A/B testing, we can get other insights regarding issues that can and should be fixed in the model.
  
  ## **Recommendations**

Perform A/B testing to test the effectiveness of the model on the number of overall rented bikes when compared to Capital Bikeshare which determines the number of overall rented bikes itself.

Then, things that can be done to develop the model to make it even better, such as:

1. The ML model will perform as well as the data used in building the ML model itself. We already know that the data we get is data that has been randomly split. This will greatly affect the performance of the ML model created. If we look at the existing domain knowledge, determining the number of bicycles to be rented by Capital Bikeshare users should be a case study time series regression. So it is hoped that in the future, ML models can be built using data that has been split based on the rules of the time series in order to produce better ML model performance.
1. Check which predictions have a high error value. We can group these errors into overestimation and underestimation groups, then choose the most extreme 5% error for each group. Later the grouping will be 3 groups, namely overestimation (5%), underestimation (5%), and the majority group whose error is close to the mean value (90%). After that we can check the relationship between the error and each independent variable. In the end we can find out exactly which variables and what aspects cause the model to produce high errors, so that we can retrain them with the application of other engineering features.
1. If possible, add features that are more correlative with the number of overall rented bikes, such as windspeed and traffic conditions. In addition, the addition of recent data (example: data for 2013, 2014, and so on) for CapitalBikeshare overall bike rented will certainly improve the predictive capacity of the model.
1. The model that has been built can be used for the development of making other models. An example is making a model to predict the number of bikes rented by casual users or registered users separately. Modeling for this purpose can benefit from native data releases from CapitalBikeshare. By making a detailed prediction model for casual users and registered users, we can find out the preferences of each user in using rented bikes. In the end, the prediction accuracy of the model can be better.
